* Changes between versions   -*- mode:indented-text; mode:outline-minor -*-

This file (NEWS) documents the significant changes between all
versions of xzgv, with the newest changes first.


* Changes in xzgv 0.8

** New features

Added support for the Exif orientation tag (Exif in this context is a
form of JPEG). If you enable the "Use Exif Orientation" option in the
viewer (or `exif-orient' config/option), it'll compensate for the
(e.g.) digital camera's orientation when viewing, so pictures taken
with the camera side-on will display the way you would probably want
them to. However, since this differs from how most *other* programs
will see the files - which are, after all, carefully constructed to be
compatible with JFIF/JPEG files - and has the potential to be
extremely confusing if you don't know exactly what's going on, it's
not enabled by default. Thanks to Fraser Wright for suggesting this
feature.


** Bugfixes

Broken GIFs could overrun a buffer previously - fixed.

Added call to gtk_set_locale() which should hopefully avoid problems
when GTK+'s default font is set to something which isn't
ASCII-friendly. Thanks to Alexander Pohoyda for this one.

Fixed JPEG segfault bug on files which were corrupted after the image
itself. Thanks to Aaron Brick for spotting this one.

Fixed long-standing bug with interpolation, which could have resulted
in segfaults (though it's hard to say if it ever actually did).

Stopped selector getting permanently hidden if two middle-button
presses were too close together. Thanks to José Luis González González
for spotting this.

No longer sets background colour to black for mono PNG files, where
this may cause problems. This change was ported from zgv; thanks to
Morten Bo Johansen for spotting it there.


** Other changes

Added 9/0 keys as yet another way of doing file untag/tag. These are
last-ditch alternatives for keyboards where -/= don't make sense (some
non-US/UK keyboards), and where keypad -/+ aren't easily accessible
(e.g. laptops). Thanks to Szabó, Balázs for inspiring this one.


* Changes in xzgv 0.7

** New features

Now adapts rendering method for big images. When the number of pixels
in the image exceeds the value set by image-bigness-threshold (as set
in config file or on command-line, defaulting to 2 million pixels),
it's drawn piece-by-piece on demand rather than all-at-once. The
all-at-once behaviour is worth keeping around for smaller images, as
it gives much nicer scrolling - but for big images it's just
impractical, hence this feature.

Added a builtin TIFF reader (libtiff-based); TIFFs should be read more
quickly now.

Also uses builtin JPEG reader (libjpeg-based) for all JPEG reading now
(not just thumbnails), which is a tiny bit faster. A new command-line
and config file option `careful-jpeg' lets you enable `fancy
upsampling', the disabling of which is why Imlib's reader was
previously faster. (I wouldn't have chosen this as the default if I'd
known, but enabling it means a 10% slowdown. :-/)

Added support for PRF (ported from zgv), which is basically a kind of
extrapolated version of my old mrf format - unlike mrf, PRF supports
greyscale and colour. Thanks to Brian Raiter for both devising the
format, and writing the reference implementation readprf.c is heavily
based on.

Recursive thumbnail update no longer reads all thumbnails before doing
updates - it now only bothers to read visible thumbnails. This makes
the `fast-recursive-update' option rather less useful, as it's nearly
that fast already. :-)

Added choice of timestamps to use when sorting in time/date order -
you can now choose between mtime (default), ctime, and atime. You can
switch with alt-shift-m/c/a, or from the selector menu's
Directory/Time & Date Type submenu, or with `sort-timestamp-type'
option (on command-line or in config file). Thanks for Wolfram Kleff
for suggesting this.

You can now move to the next/previous tagged file with `/' and `?'
respectively (or equivalent menu options). When used in the viewer,
this also views the file.

Toggling all tags is now possible, with Alt-o or Tagging/Toggle All.

Added `delete-single-prompt' option (on command-line and in config
file) so you can disable the confirmation prompt when deleting a file,
rather like zgv's `nodelprompt'. Thanks to Martin Bialasinski for
suggesting this.

Added help menus. Currently just runs info on the relevant node -
pretty crude, but better than nothing. :-)

Keyboard navigation additions - you can now use shifted cursor keys as
an alternative means of paging up/down/left/right in the viewer, and
^u/^v/^a/^e are supported as alternatives to Page Up/Page Down and
Home/End in both the selector and the viewer.

Any `Menu' key you might have can now be used to show the
selector/viewer menus, just as right-clicking or pressing F10 does.


** Bugfixes

A fix for certain unusual GIFs (with an abnormally large code size -
larger than even non-LZW GIFs need), which previously caused xzgv to
segfault. Thanks to Lenart Janos (in particular), Josip Rodin, Chris
Lawrence, and Andy Mortimer for all helping with this in one way or
another.

Changed make install's `install -m' invocations to do plain install
and change permissions after (with chmod). Thanks to Steven Bankowitz
for reminding me of `-m' being a problem on things like Solaris.

Replaced make install's ifeq/ifneq with shell equivalent, which turns
out to be sufficient (if uglier). This should avoid the need to use
GNU make. Thanks to Frank Pohl for spotting this problem.

Previously, the GIF/PNG/mrf file readers failed to notice the problem
images larger than 32767 in either dimension would cause (by being
bigger than an X window can handle), leading to a segfault - they now
give an error.

Fixed bug where (while thumbnails were being loaded) doing things like
holding down space to storm through N images got it very confused
indeed.

Concerted attempt to nail all the remaining recursion problems
(essentially, it could previously get confused if you told it to do
certain things twice, and it saw the second request while dealing with
the first). Not perfect though, as the protections are
independent (do a mirror and flip at about the same time, and it'll
mess up), so this needs a better fix eventually.

Previously, when you scaled down as far as it would go, it would never
let you scale down again in the same way, due to breaking an
anti-recursion measure. Fixed that.

`-lz' was missing from src/Makefile. I usually got away with this, but
it did break in some cases (perhaps with Imlib 1.9.10?). Thanks to
Gabor Z. Papp for pointing this out.

The alternative up/down movement keys in the selector (j and k) should
now work the same way cursor up/down do.

Focus is now returned to selector when changing dir, making the
past-position action clearer when using the mouse (i.e. if you go down
into a dir and then back up, the keyboard cursor will show which dir
you just left). Previously, if you'd viewed an image before changing
dir with the mouse, focus would have remained on the image.

Now does cursor past-position save/restore `around' recursive update.

As must be traditional by now, I found a bug almost immediately after
the (0.6) release. :-) Previously you could still toggle thin-rows
while running in the `xzgv file(s)' way, which was silly and made
things look strange (but was otherwise harmless).

Fixed redraw-related position problem. (In 0.6, try going to the end
of the selector's list, pressing `v', then pressing `v' again - the
row positioning is slightly wrong.)


** Other changes

Rendering (and fallback file-reading) is now indirected through the
new backend.c, which should now be the only part of xzgv dependent on
Imlib 1.x (well, apart from src/Makefile). This should make it easier
to switch backends, or to support multiple backends. I've also added
most of a gdk-pixbuf backend, but I've not been too impressed with the
performance, and there are some inconvenient omissions which explain
the current, uh, `partialness'. :-)

Now makes sure a page of thumbnails is visible even when doing
non-recursive update - previously doing such an update before all
thumbnails had been read in would show blank spots during the update
(unlike the now-usual xzgv behaviour of loading onscreen thumbnails
asap). This only seems to slow it down fractionally (by about 0.5% in
a large dir full of small files in thin-rows mode), so I think it's
worth it to get the consistency.

Various changes to the selector and viewer menus, in an attempt to
tidy things up a bit.

`make install' permissions are now Debian-ish, i.e. explicitly marked
as writeable by root (rather than implicitly so ;-)), and all
world-readable.

No longer includes the version number in the window title.


* Changes in xzgv 0.6

** New features

Added gamma support, but as with brightness/contrast this is only
available from the keyboard for now. (This works just like it does in
zgv, though I added it to xzgv first.) The basic idea is to ignore the
rather unworkable image/screen gamma distinction, and just use a
relative gamma with fast shortcuts for common cases. So pressing `1'
gives a gamma adjustment of 1.0 (i.e. no adjustment), `2' gives 2.2
(for e.g. viewing linear-gamma files on an average PC monitor), `3'
gives 1/2.2 (~0.45, for e.g. viewing 2.2-gamma files on a linear-gamma
display), and `4' reverts to any `--gamma' setting (or 1.0 if none was
set). You can also use alt-comma and alt-dot for more precise control
of gamma adjustment. Note that gamma is deliberately *not* reset by
the brightness/contrast resetting keys.

You can now change the sorting order from the command-line with
`-o'/`--sort-order' (and from a config file similarly).


** Bugfixes

Added my own PNG reader (well, libpng interface :-)), ported from zgv.
This avoids a couple of Imlib problems - notably, greyscale PNGs are
now read correctly.

If you omitted the arg to an option in a config file, it would
segfault. Fixed that, and applied brown paper bag as appropriate. :-)
It would also previously get stuck in an infinite loop if given a
bogus geometry arg, and it assumed $HOME was set - both fixed.

GIF reader was previously broken for interlaced GIFs with less than 4
lines; this broke the heap, leading to difficult-to-pin-down
segfaults. No longer. :-)

Various portability fixes - thanks to Steven Bankowitz, Juergen Salk,
and Norio Suzuki for letting me know how 0.5 did on various non-Linux
systems. I hope xzgv will now compile and run ok on *BSD, Solaris, and
HP-UX, though there are probably still issues with installation in
some cases.

Before, when you used decoupled scaling and then rotated a picture, it
messed up when resetting things for the next picture. Fixed that.

Now copes with copy/move when started as `xzgv file(s)'. It's not
perfect, in that the selector isn't updated (so after a move things
can be confusing), but at least it's usable.

When rescanning the directory (in the control-r sense :-)), the
keyboard cursor now tries to stay at the same place in dir list, for
consistency with zgv and because it's just nicer. Thanks to Philippe
Marzouk for spotting this one.

The file details dialog now works fully even when started with `xzgv
file(s)' (previously the details from any thumbnail were missing).


** Other changes

Made icon a bit less indistinct. :-)


* Changes in xzgv 0.5

** New features

Massively reduced *apparent* thumbnail load time, by making it jump
around to whichever part of the directory you're currently looking at.
(It does eventually fill in any gaps, even if you maliciously keep
moving around in an attempt to put it off. Not that I had fun testing
this, or anything. :-)) It's debatable whether this counts as a new
feature or not, but what the heck...

Clicking on the viewer now moves to the next image. Dragging the
picture around still works - any mouse movement at all during the
click, and the picture gets dragged instead. (If you want/need to
disable this for some reason, you can do so with `click-for-next off'
in ~/.xzgvrc.) Thanks to Paul E. Johnson for this idea.

Decoupled (axis-specific) scaling, which lets you scale both axes of
the picture independently. Thanks to Steven Flintham for suggesting
this. The way this works is analogous to how the `normal' scaling
works, but hard to explain briefly - you'll have to check the
`Scaling' section of the info file or man page.


** Bugfixes

Fixed a significant memory leak, though you probably wouldn't have
noticed it unless you did a recursive thumbnail update on a fairly
well-populated hierarchy. I have a feeling this fix *may* break older
GTK+ versions; if changing directory segfaults, you need to upgrade.
:-) It's known to work on at least GTK+ >=1.2.6.

Fixed the MMX stuff, which is now enabled by default again.

Previously, if you had auto-hide and zoom turned on, then turned off
auto-hide, the picture wasn't rezoomed when the selector was shown -
fixed that.

Fixed recursion problems in scaling. Thanks to Steven Flintham (again)
for reminding me about this.

Added preliminary check when reading files from command-line, to get
rid of (at least in most cases) the window-open-then-close ugliness
you used to get before a `no files' error message.

Previously, jumping from a large dir to a large dir (or even to a
small dir, sometimes) could result in the redrawing of the main window
being noticeably delayed after the dir-change window being destroyed -
fixed that (mostly).


** Other changes

Added short option `-r' for zoom-reduce-only. It's a useful enough
option that it's worth having a shortcut. :-)

It's now slightly easier to install the info file/man page in an
FHS-friendly PREFIX/share (e.g. /usr/share/man/man1). However, the
traditional locations are still the default, as I suspect e.g.
/usr/local/share/man/man1 is much less widely accepted than
/usr/local/man/man1. If you're installing in /usr, though,
uncommenting the SHARE_INFIX line may be a good idea.

Selector rows have been made 2 pixels taller, to allow room for the
outline cursor to go either side of the thumbnail rather than
potentially XORing over it. In addition to being a little more
aesthetically pleasing :-), this works around what seems to be a GTK+
bug (as of 1.2.7 at least), where scrolling with the cursor keys can
leave part of the XOR'd cursor outline stuck on the thumbnail (I
suspect the pixmap is being drawn at the wrong time).


* Changes in xzgv 0.4

** New features

Added brightness/contrast, which works in just the same way as in zgv.
No mouse equivalent yet though, as I'm having some difficulty thinking
of a reasonable way to do it. (I may even end up (ab)using a modal
dialog for it, which would be *odd* but may be the least unreasonable
approach given the way xzgv works in general.) I'd ended up putting it
off for a while to ponder this, but in the end decided to get it done
and add the mousey version later.

Added file rename. The key it's on is heavily suboptimal (^n), but all
the good ones were taken. :-) Menu-wise it's ok though.

You can now use j/k for down/up in the selector, as vi-like
alternatives to the cursor keys.


** Bugfixes

Fixed the problem with toggling zoom off and on quickly, where
scrollbars were disabled but an unzoomed image was shown instead of a
zoomed one.

Now avoids the nasty `shear' effect you got when updating thumbnails
and it needed to scroll the window before updating a thumbnail.


** Other changes

I've (temporarily, I hope) disabled the MMX stuff by default; some
people were having trouble compiling with that enabled. You can still
enable it by editing config.mk.

Renamed `Exit viewer' menu item to `Exit to Selector', which should
make the meaning less ambiguous.

15/16-bit dithering can now be toggled with shift-f, by analogy with
zgv's `fakecols' toggle.


* Changes in xzgv 0.3

** New features

Added file copy/move. These work like zgv - copy/move tagged files if
any tagged, otherwise copy/move the file the cursor is on. (Being
zgv-like also means they stop if they run across an existing file,
which can be a little annoying but is probably safest.)

Scaling can now scale the image *down* as well as up. That is, you can
make the image smaller more controllably than you can by using zoom
mode. I thought I'd add this as, given the way Imlib works, it comes
very cheaply indeed. However, it tends to only be useful (i.e. be any
advantage over zoom mode) on big images, where you might want to scale
down a bit rather than a lot. One thing I should point out - if you've
got used to doing e.g. shift-d lots to get back to 1:1, you'll just
have to learn about the `n' (= Scaling/Normal) key... :-)

You can now set the selector's initial/default width with
`--selector-width' (or config file setting).

You can now use `-k' or `--skip-parent' (or config file entry) to skip
the (keyboard) cursor past `..' on the directory xzgv starts on. This
can be useful when you want to immediately use space to `page' through
a dir. Thanks to Steven Flintham for this idea.

New `invert-logo' config file option, flips the colours in the logo to
look less awful on dark GTK+ themes. :-)


** Bugfixes

The idle_zoom_resize() idle func is now default priority rather than
resize priority. This fixes a problem where zoom mode resizes were one
resize behind (!) - thanks to Steven Flintham for pointing this out.

Various things which implicitly turned off zoom mode (basically
scaling and `normal') didn't reenable scrollbars afterwards; fixed
that.

Added getopt.[ch] and getopt1.c from glibc, so things should hopefully
still work on a libc which lacks getopt_long().

Fixed a couple of spurious blank lines in man page.


** Other changes

Added MMX-aware version of scaling with interpolation code (using a
bundled copy of Hank Dietz/Randy Fisher's libmmx). According to my
tests, it's `only' about 35% faster, but it feels like more. :-)
(Don't worry, it's easily disabled at compile time, it's clueful about
when it uses it even when it's enabled, etc. - I haven't broken
anything.)

Removed mention of the forfree.at email address, which seems to be
b0rken :-(, and replaced with my actual current address.

Created an `AUTHORS' file (which just points at the main docs, I'm
sure a duplicate copy would get out of date :-)).


* Changes in xzgv 0.2

** New features

Generation of thumbnails is *much* faster. This is partly due to
inclusion of the JPEG speedup code contributed to zgv (way back when)
by Costa Sapuntzakis, and partly due to a generic adaptation of that
approach I've added which is now used for all other files. xzgv should
now generate thumbnails at a similar speed to xv overall - it's a bit
faster on JPEGs, but a bit slower on other files.

Added recursive thumbnail update. One problem with this is that it
reads all existing thumbnails in a dir before updating (like xv, IIRC)
to try and avoid having a really ugly selector during the update :-),
though you can disable this with `--fast-recursive-update' or an
equivalent config file line.

Added `-g'/`--geometry' option (and config file setting), which lets
you set the xzgv window's geometry in the usual X fashion. As an
extension, all positions/sizes can be given as percentages of the
screen size, e.g. `92%x85%'.

Now has tagging - `-' untags, `=' tags, and with Alt (Meta) they
untag/tag all. As for the mouse, ctrl-click tags/untags, and there's
now a File menu which has items for tag/untag, and tag/untag all. From
the viewer, you can tag (though not untag) with ctrl-space, which tags
the current file then moves to the next image. One problem with
tagging is that, at the moment, only the new `-T' (or `--show-tagged')
option takes any notice of whether a file is tagged or not. :-) Copy,
move, and (multi-file) delete should be added `soon', possibly with
slideshows after that.

`File details' popup (on `:', `;', and Selector menu, File, Details)
shows size, date/time, etc. of the file under the keyboard cursor, or
the file right-clicked on when the selector's menu was popped up.
(This is also how the tag/untag menu items work, though in that case
using ctrl-click is obviously more convenient.)

Added file delete with confirmation (on ctrl-d and Selector menu,
File, Delete). The way the file to delete is selected is the same as
for `file details'.

There's now a reduce-only option for zoom mode, meaning you can have
xzgv fit big pictures to the window without having tiny icons etc.
balloon up and look horrible. It's not the default, but you can enable
it with Alt-r or the viewer options menu's "When Zooming Reduce Only"
toggle or `--zoom-reduce-only' or equivalent config file setting.
Thanks to Steven Flintham and Robert Braddock for this idea.

Middle-clicking on the viewer now toggles the selector rather than
always acting like Exit viewer. Thanks to Steven Flintham for
suggesting this.

`go to dir' dialog. (Only text-entry for now (!), but I'll probably
extend it at some point.) On shift-g, and Directory/Change.

You can now `close' a file (clear the viewer). On ctrl-w, and
File/Close.

Added a way to rescan a directory (ctrl-r, Directory/Rescan).

You can now set whether to use 15/16-bit dithering or not independent
of Imlib's default setting. The option is Options/Dither in 15 &
16-bit on the viewer menu, and can also be set by --dither-hicol or
equivalent config file setting.


** Bugfixes

It previously segfaulted on files less than 4 bytes long due to a
typo. Um, whoops... :-}

Previously it would hang on some corrupt GIFs. The fix for this
reflects the one in zgv 5.0, and thanks go to Andy Mortimer for the
fix (to zgv, but it (currently) applies to xzgv too).

Fixed problem where xzgv's moving the focused row `by hand' sometimes
messed up the display. And similarly, when the selector lost focus due
to selecting a picture, it previously didn't undraw the focused row.

It now copes with being started in an unreadable dir, and avoids
selecting files/dirs it doesn't have sufficient permissions for.

Pixmaps for dirs and thumbnailless pics are now shaped, rather than
having an ugly white background.

Fixed bug where, if you enabled zoom on a picture of nearly the same
shape as the viewer window, it left the scrollbars on.

Esc now exits an error dialog (making it consistent with the other ones).

It no longer keeps saying "Reading file..." on the statusbar if a file
couldn't be read.


** Other changes

Thumbnail updates now make sure any row a thumbnail is being updated
for is visible, making the update look more like it does in zgv - as
well as making it rather more clear what's going on. :-)

Bothered giving it a half-decent logo. :-) Also has a similar icon.

Replaced the directory/file-without-thumbnail icons with nicer ones.
They're loosely based on gmc's `dir-close.xpm', which I think Tuomas
Kuosmanen was responsible for (judging from the change log). Thanks
also to Steven Flintham for pointing out that the old icons were
pretty crap. :-)

Changed Sort Order menu items to be `Sort by Name' etc. under new
`Directory' menu to accomodate `Change' and `Rescan'.

Error dialogs look a bit better.

Install targets now use `mkinstalldirs' (from texinfo) to make paths
to installation dirs first. It seems the FHS guarantees little if
anything about /usr/local, so this is basically required rather than
merely being a good idea.


* Changes in xzgv 0.1

** New features

Everything. :-)
