xzgv 0.8 - picture viewer for X, with thumbnail-based file selector.
Copyright (C) 1999-2003 Russell Marks.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.


Roadmap
-------

The COPYING file contains a copy of the GPL described above.

The NEWS file describes the changes made in each version, so if you're
upgrading from an old xzgv, be sure to read the relevant parts of
that.

ChangeLog is similar to NEWS, but more hacker-orientated. :-)

See INSTALL for details of how to install.


Description
-----------

xzgv is a picture viewer for X, with a thumbnail-based file selector.
It uses GTK+ and Imlib. Most file formats are supported, and the
thumbnails used are compatible with xv, zgv, and the Gimp. It can also
be used with `xzgv file(s)', to effectively bypass the file selector.
For more on how xzgv works and how to use it, do `info xzgv' or `man
xzgv' once it's installed.

xzgv differs from other picture viewers for X in that it uses one
window for both the file selector and viewer, it (unlike xv) allows
both scrolling and fit-to-window methods of viewing large pictures,
and it (unlike xv and some others) doesn't ever mangle the picture's
aspect ratio without you telling it to.

It also provides extensive keyboard support; if you prefer using the
keyboard, this is probably the best viewer for you. But it doesn't
skimp on the mousey stuff, either.

So anyway, it's just terribly great. :-)


About use of GTK+ 1.x and Imlib 1.x
-----------------------------------

xzgv currently uses rather old libraries for the GUI and image
rendering. I realise this is an issue, and both should be changed at
some point. But realistically, this isn't going to be any time soon.


Contacting me
-------------

You can email me at rus@svgalib.org.


Share and enjoy! 

-Rus.
